Installing and configuring Ansible in Ubuntu Linux

Install Ansible

sudp apt update
sudo apt install ansible -y

Configuring ssh connection between Ansible VMs (Control Node)
and Target Machines(managed nodes)

Generate key-pair using ssh-keygen in the Ansible machine using ssh-keygen.

Now, copy the public key of the Ansible machine to the 
~/.ssh/authorized_keys of the target machine.

Ansible Playbook

Playbooks are used to execute many tasks in the target VM. Playbook are not always 
required to execute ansible tasks. We can use ansible commands similar to shell and 
python commands in the CLI. These commands are called Ansible adhoc commands. 
For executing one or two simple tasks on the target servers we can use adhoc commands.

cat inventory
172.16.32.56

ansible [host-pattern] -m [module] -a "[module options]"

ansible -i inventory all -m "shell" -a "touch devopsclass"

Here, a shell module is used to execute the task of creating a file in the target VM
-m option for using shell module and -a option is for adding arguments to this module.

Ansible modules

modules are pre-buit ansible scripts for executing most command tasks.
-m option in the above command instructs ansible to use shell module
to execute the touch command in the target machine.

ansible -i inventory all -m "shell" -a "df"
ansible -i inventory all -m "shell" -a "nproc"

How do you group severs in Ansible? How do you execute some commands 
on a specifc servers.?

Using groups:
[webservers]
[dbservers]

# first-plyabook.yml
---
- name: Install and start nginx
  hosts: all
  become: true

  tasks:
  - name: Install nginx
    apt:
      name: nginx
      state: present
  - name: Start nginx
    service:
      name: nginx
      state: started

To execute the ansible script in first-plyabook.yml,

ansible-playbook -vv -i inventory first-playbook.yml

Realtime usage of IaC tools: Terraform and Ansible
Configure kubernetes cluster using ansible
create 3 ec2 instances in AWS      (Terraform)
configure 1 node as master         (ansible)
configure 2 nodes are worker nodes (ansible)

Ansible roles
efficient way of writing ansible playbooks

mkdir ansgal && cd ansgal

ansible-galaxy role init kubernetes
- Role kuberebets was created successfully

ls -ltr kubernetes
