Ansible - Written in Python Programming Language

Best features of Ansible:
1. Ansible Nodes: Ansible is installed on a machine called as Control Node.
   The target machines that Ansible configures are called as Managed Nodes.

2. Agentless:  Ansible is Agentless - means Ansible need to be installed only
   on the Control Node and it not required on Target machines or Managed nodes.

3. Ansible working: Ansible in Control Node connects to Managed nodes using ssh for Linux 
   machines and winRM for windows machines. After connecting to the managed nodes,
   Ansible executes the configuration scripts or commands on these Managed nodes.

4. Passwordless authentication: An ssh connection uses key-value pairs containing
   a public key and a private key. These keys are generated using ssh-keygen command 
   on the Control Node. Once the keys are generated, we push the public key of the
   Control Node to all the managed nodes and setup the Ansible connection between
   Control Node and managed nodes.

5. Inventory file: How does Ansible knnow which are the Managed nodes?
   Ansible Inventory file: /etc/ansible/hosts on the Control Node has the list of IP 
   address of the Managed Nodes. We create a group [client-vm] in the hosts file 
   and add the public IP addresses of the managed nodes in that group. We use multiple
   groups to group related managed nodes.
   Ex: [database]  [webservers]
       ipaddress1   ipaddress2
       ipaddress2   ipaddress4

6. Ansible Modules: modules are programs that are pushed to the servers or managed nodes
   for executing specific tasks. Units of code that Ansible sends to the remote nodes 
   for execution.
   examples: 
    apt module: for installation or removal of packages in ubuntu machines
    copy module: to copy files from control node to managed nodes
    shell module: to execute shell commands in the managed nodes

Hands-on: steps for setting up ssh connection
1. Create 2 VMs: Create EC2 instances from AWS console. 
2. Ansible Control Node: Mark first VM as Ansible Control Node - from this VM, 
   Ansible commands wil be run to confiugre the 2nd VM.
3. Managed Node: Mark 2nd VM as Managed Node. On this VM, ansible will be executing the
   configuration script to install specific tools, softwares and secuirty patches
4. SSH to Control Node: Login to the Control node as root user
5. ssh-keygen: Generate ssh key-pair in control node using ssh-keygen command 
6. Copy the public key in id_rsa.pub to the  ~/.ssh/authorized_keys file in managed node
7. From Control Node, ssh to the managed node(s) to ascertain that the connection
   between Ansible node and managed nodes is working.
8. Run Ansible commands in Control Node to configure the Managed nodes.
