IaC - Infrastructure as Code

Lets say we have developed an application and we deploy it on a k8s cluster.
The k8s clusters such as EKS, Virtual machines like EC2 are infrastructures.

Deploying the application on the infrastructure for once is ok. But if this 
needs to be repeated many times and on many environments, then it is going 
to be hectic, prone to errors and it would not be an efficient way to do.

Therefore we use IaC.
IaC - a way to provision and manage resources using scripts and executing these
scripts one or many times to create resources instead of creating them fron UI
manually. This script can be tracked or Version controlled in Git. 

IaC - Provision resources and Configure
Provision - creating 10 ubuntu VMs is Provision of compute resource
Configration - installing jenkins, Nexus on these VMs is configuration

IaC Tools - Terraform, Ansible are most popular tools as they are open source,
provide better features compared to other IaC tools and has wide community support.

Provisioning - Terraform is best suited for Provisioning resources
Configuring  - Ansible is best suited for Configuring

Terraform
IaC tool by Hashicorp for provisioning of resources on AWS, GCP and Azure.
by using scripts in HCL format. It is written in Go language.

declarative
Terraform script uses declarative language of definging the resources to be
provisioned. Terraform ensures that current state or final state should be 
the desired state as defined in the terraform scripts(.tf files) 

idempotent - the desired state should not change and there should not be an
increase in the number of resources even if we run the script multiple times.

Some basic terminologies

Infrastructure:

Infrastructure is the computer data centre resources such as virtual machines,
containers, networks, and storage.

IaC means defining the infrastructure resources using machine readable declarative
configuration files or scripts so as to allow for automated provisioning, scaling,
and management of infrastructure resources rather than doing it manually.

What is Declarative configuration in IaC?

Declarative Configuration means using a declarative syntax to specify 'what' must 
be the desired state of the infrastructure rather than 'how' it has to be achieved. 
'What' is the functional approach of creating the resources where as 'How' is the 
procedural or imperative approach as it gives steps to achieve the desired state

Why IaC? What are the problems with the traditional management of infrastrcuture?

Problems with the manaual management of infrastructure resources are 

Manual Configuration Errors
prone to human errors. Small inconsistencies or misconfigurations can lead to 
system failures, security vulnerabilities, or performance issues.

Lack of Consistency
it's challenging to ensure consistency across different environments (e.g., 
development, staging, production). Each environment may be configured differently,
leading to inconsistencies and difficulties in replicating deployments.

Slow and Error-Prone Deployment Processes
increases the likelihood of errors and delays in deploying changes to infrastructure.

Difficulty in Scaling
scaling infra is complex and time-consuming. 

Limited Visibility and Control
manually managed infr lacks visibility, difficult to track changes, audit configurations, 
and enforce compliance with security policies and best practices.

High Operational Overhead
requires significant operational effort, including repetitive tasks such as provisioning, 
configuration, and maintenance. It can hinder productivity and divert resources from 
higher-value activities.

What is Provisioning of resources? How is it different from Configuration Management?

Provisioning of resource means creating of infrastructure resources on a cloud. 
Terraform is the mist popular Provisioning tool

Configuration means installing the necesaary tools, softwares in those resources
and managing them like updating the tools, fixing security issues, applying patches
etc. Ansible is the most popular Iac Configuration tool.



