Kubernetes - important points, tips, tit-bits, best practices, etc .

Master Node is K8s - 
There can be more than 1 master node in a k8s cluster. But it is recommended 
to have a single master node primarily for simplicity and ease of management, 
coft-effectiveness and for small-scale non-production kubernetes cluster such 
as for dev environment. 

However, there are scenarios where having multiple master nodes can provide 
advantages in terms of high availability, scalability, fault tolerance and load
balancing, making it suitable for production environments and larger Kubernetes 
clusters where reliability and performance are critical requirements.

kubeval - To validate the yaml manifests before applying
Installation:
wget https://github.com/instrumenta/kubeval/releases/latest/download/kubeval-linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar xf kubeval-linux-amd64.tar.gz
sudo cp kubeval /usr/local/bin

Jenkins user needs to be created in k8s cluster to allow jenkins
to deploy application to k8s cluster.

Troubleshooting issues in k8s -

ImagePullBackOffError
reasons could be
credentials to private registry
image may not exist

crashloopbackoffError
there could be many reasons.
To find the reason, we need to go inside the pod using
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- /bin/bash
and debug

kubeconfig file for kubernetes
Location of the kubeconfig file is /root/.kube/
cat /root/.kube/config
cluster information like server URL is needed by third party tool like Jenkins for 
deployment of application on k8s cluster.
Jenkins need serverURL, credentials, service account in k8s for deploying
an application in k8s cluster.

Setting up Jenkins
install java jdk17
install jekins

istio service mesh

Difference between K8s object and resource

The terms "object" and "resource" are often used interchangeably in the context
of Kubernetes, an object represents a desired state defined by users, while a 
resource represents an instance of that object managed by the Kubernetes API 
server within the cluster.

Doubts cleared:
Which tools are important for devops?
Tools very important for devops: CICD Tool, docker and k8s.

What are Upstream and Downstream processes in Devops?
These terms are used with respect to cicd and gitops. Say for 
example, we have Jenkins job1 and job2 where job2 is dependent on
job1 to complete, i.e. job 2 will be triggered after job1 is completed.
Job1 process is upstream process as it produces the artifacts and 
job2 is the downstream process as it consumes the artifacts to deploy 
them in production or testing environment.

In summary, upstream processes are those that come before in the pipeline
and produce artifacts or changes, while downstream processes are those that 
come after and consume or utilize those artifacts or changes. 

What are GroupId and ArtifactId?
GroupId: refers to the organisation or company that owns the whole project.
ArtifactID: name of the project used in the context of pushing of artifact
to Nexus using NexusArtifactUploader plugin in Jenkins.

Security in kubernetes - best practices
How to encrypt etcd for secrets?