This guide lists the steps for Node Maintenance.

Maintenance of Node means - 
upgrading Kubernetes components 
rebooting the node or 
making hardware changes

Draining of Node
Maintaining of nodes involves eviction of pods that are already 
scheduled on that node. This eviction of pods on a node is called
Draining of Node.

Draining of Nodes involes following steps:

1. Preparation     -   reschdule existing pods on a node on other nodes.
2. Cordon the Node -   kubectl cordon <node-name>
3. Drain the Node  -   kubectl drain <node-name> --ignore-daemonsets
4. Confirm Pods Have Been Evicted - 
   kubectl get pods --all-namespaces -o wide | grep <node-name>
5. Perform Maintenance Tasks -   upgrading Kubernetes components, 
   rebooting the node, or making hardware changes.
6. uncordon the Node - kubectl uncordon <node-name>
   to allow new pods to be scheduled onto it

1. Preparation - 
It involves gracefully evicting all the pods running
on that node and ensuring that they can be rescheduled onto other nodes
in the cluster before performing maintenance tasks on the node.

2. Cordon the Node - 
marking it as unschedulable to prevent new pods from being 
scheduled onto it. This step ensures that no new workload is added 
to the node while maintenance is in progress.

3. Drain the Node - 
drain it to evict all the pods running on it. Kubernetes will
gracefully terminate the pods and reschedule them onto other nodes in the cluster.
The --ignore-daemonsets flag is used to ensure that daemonset-managed pods 
(pods that are supposed to run on every node) are not evicted. If you're certain 
you want to evict daemonset-managed pods as well, you can omit this flag.

4. Confirm Pods Have Been Evicted - 
After draining the node, verify that all pods 
have been successfully evicted and are running on other nodes in the cluster.

5. Perform Maintenance Tasks - 
With all the pods evacuated from the node, you can 
perform maintenance tasks such as upgrading Kubernetes components, rebooting the node, 
or making hardware changes.

6. Uncordon the Node -  
Once maintenance is complete and the node is ready to resume 
normal operation, "uncordon" the node to allow new pods to be scheduled onto it.
